hi I'm Rick Emmett from triumph and
we're here to talk a little bit about
lead guitar soloing which is maybe a bit
of a lost art certainly there's not as
many records that have guitar solos as
there used to be keith moon once said
that a good concert set was start with a
bang
end with a bang and then everything in
the middle doesn't matter and so you
know a guitar solo can kind of sort of
be like that - it really should have a
good starting note and guys that I
played in bands with would always say
you know when the solo comes like really
make a nice definitive statement and so
whenever I start I want to have a note
that has a lot of expression to it and
one of the things that I learned early
on was a thing about over bending so a
band is always a good thing to start
with so if I was playing in key of E and
I started a solo with this note make
that nice bent note but I warm it up
with vibrato after I do it cuz it gives
it character gives it personality it's
not just boring now it starts to sing a
little bit that vibrato that laughing
kind of quality that's the thing that
sort of makes the notes jump out when
you start but the over Bend is instead
of just I might go like so instead of
bending just one tone I'm bending a
couple
that's a minor third and I'm sorry I
make faces but I can't help but that's
what guitar players do when you play
this note you have to make this face
it's just in the rule book once you're
into a solo the the next thing you're
trying to do is just kind of capture an
emotional feeling of the song so for
myself I might pay attention to what the
melody was that the singer was singing
what may be the main theme of the song
was and that I wouldn't want to
necessarily play it just exact I would
look to like theme and variations you
sort of figure out a way to give it a
little bit of variety or color then if I
was trying to develop the solo then I
would think okay so now I'm supposed to
maybe show off some chops or or get a
little busier rant ratchet up the energy
that's going on so now I might employ
techniques like pull offs to get more
notes in shorter spaces of time
use kind of scales to build upon that
kind of stuff and that would create the
energy and now you're getting towards
the ending so to go back to the Keith
Moon thing you know you start with
something good and you end with
something good you look for something
that you know caps the solo for the end
so you might I don't know I might use a
two string band it has a real truck
brakes kind of whoo kind of sound to it
that works you know there's other ones
something like that I think the mistake
that a lot of guitar players make with
solos is they think oh I have to you
know show how great I am right from the
beginning and I have to play really fast
it's not his speed that makes you know
Eddie Van Halen a great guitar player
it's the fact that his feel is so great
and his ability to to hit the right
notes in the right places so you know
there are easy things to do to make lots
of notes happen like you can play
arpeggios that pull off to open shape
and that's it gives energy without
necessarily being overly crazy busy as
soon as I start running double picked
kind of and that's these are flurries of
notes flurries of notes shouldn't exist
as the main statement they should only
exist to get you from one place to the
other there's guys that teach jazz
guitar say you know if you get yourself
paint yourself into a corner you're only
ever one fret away from solving your
problem because that's kind of how music
works and in rock guitar for rock
soloing one of the easy ways to be able
to if you painted yourself into a corner
there's little tricks that you can use
and one of them would be a pick slide
you know so your fingers are getting
tired because you've been wanking away
for so long that oh my god you know
you're you're out of ideas in your hand
to soar so you do one of these things
where you use the edge of the pick and
you're just kind of
it's great so and I start fast so I get
high pitch and then I slow down and
you've heard you know tons of guitar
players do it but it's kind of a cool
thing just create sound effects you know
another one is a little slide off some
things like there's things where you
just give it up so I'm playing a blues
kind of little slides it like glissandos
and you know I'm also doing a thing
there where I'm doing edge of pick
harmonics so instead of a note just
being all along a strings length there
are places where you can pick it where
they're like they're harmonic nodes so
if the edge of the pick hits in a place
where
Billy Gibbons of ZZ Top was a guy that
does a lot of that and Brian may have
Queen uses a coin to play and so he uses
they can hear how there's like two
octaves up there's something there that
dogs are beginning to bark all over the
neighborhood
I miss KTAR solos but I always liked it
when songs had solos because solos
functioned in the same way that a bridge
functions in a song it gives you a
vacation from the song a little bit and
the solo to me was like this this second
vacation that would happen in a tune and
I really liked them but we don't get
them as much but you know I think
fashion is kind of like a wheel or maybe
like the pendulum of a clock you know it
goes out of fashion it'll come back you
know you can't stop people that play
like David Gilmour and Alex Lifeson and
Billy Gibbons and you know those kind of
guys are going to find ways to reach the
public and the public's going to go wow
that's a cool guitar player